
Regarding the federalist idea and if the European union should turn into a united states of Europe.

I don't know that much about this, I haven't spent a lot of time reading about it.

The arguement that seems to be brought is that in a world of opposing giants like the US and China, European states will need to unionise, or be played against each other, and picked apart one by one. Kind of like how big logistics corporations seem able to play small and relatively independent farmers. They seem to keep squeezing them by always finding someone else somewhere else that is more desperate and will sell for lower, and so, the majority of profits from agriculture does not end up with the people doing it, it ends up with a few large logistics middlemen. Their power seems to come from having many independent options who must then compete with each other, while their "trading partners" only have one or very few options, and so become vulnerable. Not sure if that's what people think about when they argue about Europe vs the world, but it's the analogy that comes to my mind.

So far I am sceptical to a united states of Europe. I think the member countries are too different. I don't think it would end up being a palatable option especially for northern and central Europe, who would loose a lot economically by fully merging their economies with the south of Europe. Perhaps in the future, if the balance is better, it would be less of a sacrifice.

Or, the external pressure simply becomes so big that if forces north Europe to take that hit. I don't think we've seen such pressure yet though, as of February 2026.

It's often talked about how Europe by being divided lacks sufficient concentration of power to move with force, speed, and unity. Maybe that's not as bad as it first might sound. I am not sure in which situations it is important for politics to do so. On the opposite, usually when politicians get swept up in grand plans, dumb stuff is done and budgets break. Perhaps better to move in a way that makes sense from a market point of view, with everyone free to do their twist on it, according to their circumstances. Might be more efficient. Politics usually isn't, so the less the better?

One case where speed and unity would be important is defence. Militarily is the first that comes to mind, but maybe also economically. It could be that external powers try to use the small size of each nation to put pressure, either militarily, or economically, with trade blockades or similar. In that situation, it would probably make sense with defensive alliances in Europe, to mitigate the weakness of individual size and isolation. Compare to the farming analogy.

One potential benefit of not being united might be that Europe would lack offensive capabilities. A weakness at first sight, but for anyone that wants a peaceful world, it might be good. Free and democratic countries are already a bit of a threat to dictators around the world. They are by their very existence, because they remind unfree people that there are other potential ways to live and organise society. I believe that it will always encourage domestic strives for freedom, because it's in human nature to want to be free. I think that happened evolutionarily, simply because when someone tried to control you, it was a very good sign you were about get fucked over. If they didn't want bad things for you, they would not need to control you. I think that is still very true.

To peacefully coexist in a world that is not unipolar, maybe it's for the best to be a collection of small states that help each other when pressured, but lack the capability to pressure others by the very nature of their organisation into many small separate bits that cannot move offensively in unison. Many nations of the world has a lot to worry about, and they probably always will. When was the last time you heard someone worry about Europe invading them though? Perhaps kind of neat.

