
The moon landing was a hoax. The climate issue is a scam. 9/11 was orchestrated by the government. The earth is flat.

I don't believe in the above. Most people don't. However, if asked to prove concretely that I am right, I typically cannot do it. Take the climate issue as an example. I might refer to the IPCC. You say they are a consipracy. I might show you some graphs of the atmosphere CO2 levels and temperature off the internet. You say the data is faked. And that's about it. I cannot prove it on the spot. There is no argument I can make just based on logic, detached from getting numbers from somewhere. And you're right that I did not make those graphs. I cannot personally vouch that they are accurate. I didn't write the code. I did not compile the data. I did not go around the world, installing temperature and CO2 level measurement stations. I did not manufacture the equipment to measure it. I probably don't even know how it works. So I cannot prove that those numbers check out. You're right about that.

Around 2012 or such, as a reaction to populism around climate change, some people brought charts and figures to political debates, with the idea that that would settle it and that you can't argue with the numbers. I remember, because it sounded like a good idea to me too. Luckily, I did not have to debate on TV, I just had a few chats with classmates or other random people. We learnt quickly that bringing data doesn't work. According to the argument above, the data was ignored or called fake, and good faith or incentives questioned. Nothing came out of it, and the people bringing the data inevitably ended up looking somewhat dorky. Maybe it was the awkward act of trying to angle that chart so that both moderator, opponent, and the camera could see it at the same time. Maybe it was the unavoidable association to someone trying to play teacher. Maybe just taking things a little too serious. Not quite sure.

It got me thinking. How can we be sure of what we know? Almost no information we take for granted is verifiable on the spot without relying on a bunch of people and systems to produce and deliver it.

The answer is chains of trust. Almost everything you think you know (more or less anything that is not straight up logic or math, which are unique in that they do not rely on any outside source of information) relies of chains of trust. In the climate example, we trust that the IPCC is made of competent people with good intentions. Because we trust that the people who created IPCC did so in good faith. In turn, those organisations become the anchor of trust for the actual data. We trust that they care about doing things right, and that the employ people for the measurements that do the same. We trust that there is sufficient oversight built in, so even if we cannot verify the numbers at each step, someone can. 


